IChemE
Safety & Loss Prevention
Special Interest Group

Lessons Learned Database
Individual Incident Summary Report

Incident Title: Gas Condensate Reinjection Pump Leak
Incident Type: Explosion and Fire
Date: 6th July 1988
Country: UK (offshore Scotland)
Location: Piper Oil Field (North Sea)
Fatalities: 167
Injuries: Unknown
Cost: US$ 2.4 bn (2021) - Ref. 3

Incident Description
A standby condensate pump for reinjecting gas condensate into an oil export
line on the Piper (Alpha) platform had been de-energised for maintenance.
Its discharge pressure safety valve (PSV) was also removed and blind flange
assemblies were fitted to the open PSV pipe connections. Meanwhile, the
running condensate pump failed and would not restart. Liquid levels in the
gas/liquid separation system were rising and would eventually trigger a total
shutdown of the platform if not reversed. Night shift operators were aware
the standby pump had been taken out of service for maintenance by the day
shift but believed the work had not yet begun, so they decided to re-energise
and start the standby pump. Gas condensate leaked from a PSV blind flange
assembly; it found an ignition source and exploded. The explosion was soon
followed by an oil pipe rupture and pool fire. The incident escalated rapidly
as 3 high pressure gas lines ruptured after 20, 50 and 80 mins, respectively,
creating a towering inferno. Smoke and flames outside the accommodation
module made evacuation by helicopter or lifeboat impossible.

Incident Analysis
Basic cause (most probable) was a loss of primary containment (LOPC) of
hydrocarbon condensate due to overpressure of a temporary blind flange
assembly after a pump undergoing maintenance was started in error.
Critical factors included: 1) The platform was originally designed to produce
and export oil only but was extensively modified to also enable export of gas,
2) Gas compression and condensate reinjection facilities were retrofitted
beneath the control room, electrical utility and accommodation modules, 3)
Absence of fire protection for structural steel and gas risers, 4) Continued
operation of inter-connected oil production platforms after the first explosion.
Root causes included: 1) Inadequate control of work (work permit systems),
2) Poor communication (shift handover and inter-platform), 3) Inadequate
management of change (retrofitting a gas treatment system on a congested
platform), 4) Inadequate protection (absence of automatic shutoff valves and
dedicated deluge systems for gas risers), 5) Poor emergency preparedness
(failure to conduct evacuation drills and to depressure the subsea pipelines),
6) Inadequate leadership (personal safety prioritised over process safety).

Lessons Learned
1) Offshore safety legislation should be goal-setting rather than rule-based
to foster innovation and continuous improvement in installation integrity.
2) Owner/operators of fixed and mobile offshore installations should submit
a Safety Case document to the regulator detailing how major accident risks
and safe evacuation, escape and rescue of personnel are managed,
3) Production platforms should be provided with fire and gas detection
systems, explosion protection and active (water deluge) and passive
(insulation) fire protection systems, 4) Production platforms should have
temporary safe refuges (TSRs) which protect personnel from external fire
and smoke while an emergency is assessed and/or preparations are made
for evacuation, 5) Evacuation drills should be routinely practised.

More Information
1) "Public Inquiry into the Piper Alpha Disaster, Volumes 1 and 2", Her
Majesty's Stationery Office (HMSO), ISBN 0-10-113102-X (1990).
2) "Piper Alpha - What Have We Learned?", F. Macleod and S.M.
Richardson, IChemE Loss Prevention Bulletin 261 (2018).
3) "100 Largest Losses in the Hydrocarbon Industry", Marsh Property Risk
Consulting Practice, 27th Edition (2022).

Industry Sector: Oil & Gas
Process Type: Offshore Production Platform
Incident Type: Explosion & Fire
Equipment Category: Mechanical
Equipment Class: Piping
Equipment Type: Blinds

Rev. 1
03-Jul-23

Page 1 of 1

Peter Marsh
Director - XBP Refining Consultants Ltd.